---
title: "But Why?"
metaTitle: "Y U Do Dis?"
metaDescription: "This is the meta description"
---

# Unlocking Potential

### Nothing Extraordinary

For the large majority of my school years, I was not anything special. I was a good kid, never got in trouble or had
terribly bad grades. There were times when some after-school tutoring and school work where required to get by, but it
was all tolerable. With that being said, being called a "model" or "honors" student, never occurred for most of my
school days. Trying very hard was something that was foreign and undesired. Nothing about me was remarkable and at the
time, and that was okay. I just existed, and had things that made me happy, at the time. Having a personal little bubble
meant that life was easy and relaxing. The future was not something that had no weight and was not very concerning. Not
knowing what to expect from life or even what my college major, was not something that caused any stress. Why figure it
out now, when it can solve it later? Most problems get an answer once you wait long enough. Besides, everybody else has
the same problem, right?

Once higher level education started to enter the picture, its courses where was treated the same as high school. Which
became a bit of a rude awakening. The first semesters resulted in _below average_ performance. That was the moment when
the pressure of my current standing in life started to feel real. There was a need to put in the effort to complete
assignments and study. All in the name of passing and getting to some place in life. Where that place was exactly,
remained unknown. However, I knew this is not how I get there.

Since, I was an unremarkable student throughout my career, scholarships for the higher-level education where unheard of.
The ride was on my parent's dime, and I was not doing a very good job. Though I am sure that they were happy to provide
the opportunity. Under-preforming due to a lack of trying, probably is not the best way to show gratitude. In addition,
remaining employed as a fast-food clerk/cook at KFC or a janitor at the local grocery store was not part of my long-term
life goals either. When hearing plenty of stories from various shift managers which where a bit like, "Stay in school"
and "keep good grades". Those words never really resonated at the time, though I did understand the meaning. Once school
performance started to dip, those words started to have more impact. Everything was adding up, and something needed to
change.

### Actually applying myself

The next semester after this realization, gave me the opportunity to actually apply myself. Trying for once to put the
time and effort into understanding the material and completing assignments.

Thankfully, the semester ended with good marks and even a place onto the Dean's list. Looking back now, the thought of
both putting the time and effort, and still failing, is a scary prospect. Knowing that no matter how hard I tried, not
being able to succeed would be life crushing. If that was the case, most of the stories about to be told would have
never happened. Gratitude in knowing that I am fortunate enough to be able to apply myself and see results, has been
something taken for granted.

After the semester ended with good marks, something occurred that a bit unexpected. Making an honours list was an
achievement that made both of my parents happy. In fact, I was rewarded with a laptop and a new school bag for this
accomplishment. For all I knew, I was avoiding having a mediocre life. Being given material goods and attention was a
pleasant experience that deserved to happen again.

Meaning that this trend continued for the rest of my stay at community college. Time at university was quickly moving
into the scope. Thankfully, I eventually had an epiphany as to what I wanted to study or work with. Which was something
to do with computers or related to computers. At the time, my folks where still doing a fair amount of the leg-work for
me. Meaning that my mother did all the leg work into getting me into university. While I am grateful that she did that,
it also further postponed the need for me to own adult responsibilities.

That being said, going into this experience, I knew university was the _real deal_. The weight of not getting any
scholarships or being a model student, started to feel really heavy.

> To re-iterate, reflecting now as an adult, this was something that I should have not felt as bad as I should have.
> Yes, trying and getting a partial ride with scholarships would have been nice, but they did not make out as a big deal.
> In fact, they never really said anything about it, or gave me a really hard time about it.
> Going to college was just something I took for granted and something that was provided for me, and am grateful for that.

This was the big leagues, not just the "extended high-school program" 2-year college felt like. I entered university
with my newly forming work ethic though a desire to succeed. I was no longer working hard for material things, a
high-paying job, but to make my parent's more proud of me (_and to not have to work for minimum wage the rest of my
life_).

Needless to say, university was a brand-new experience and a really stirred up the waters of my life. There was a need
to responsible for myself, because I was flying solo for the first time. In addition, I felt like I could not mess up my
grades. There is a saying: "Good Grades, Sleep, and a Social Life, pick two." Well, I chose the first two, not that my
social life was blooming social life to start off with. In turn, the first two semesters ended with high marks. Again,
really grateful that time and effort can yield positive results. Plus cherry on top was, I enjoyed the major I was
given.

Since this was university, I did not have summer classes like I did back in college. It was my 3rd year of higher
education when the late realization of, "I should get an internship" came into the foreground. The technical folks at
Dad's workplace were nice enough to take me in for the summer to learn. Another big plus was even got paid for the
experience!

Though I did not know it at the start, but that summer was the very beginning of my current chapter in life. The
realization of the vast amount of unknown topics dawned on me. The entire summer was spent picking up new concepts never
even heard of before. I would like to think that I also did a good job in the process, because they let me come back
over winter break and the next summer.

### The Point of Inflection

Those past years of actually applying myself and feeling fulfilled as a result, got me hooked on performance. Doing well
and becoming great was driven by what felt like an insatiable appetite. By this time, I already subconsciously knew that
I needed to change who I was if I wanted to make up for my unremarkable past life. Therefore, I guess past me thought
that part of that was loosing 140lbs (63kilos). There really was not a specific day or reason where I decided to make
the change, but it happened. Over the course of a year, I just barely ate enough food to get by. Learing first-hand that
weight can be lost without exercising. Though weight was lost, there was also a gain of a very unhealthy relationship
with food. Which took me a solid 5 years afterwords to overcome. I went from:

- Eating until I was more than full, because I was hungry.
- Not eating anything enough.
- Overly high-strung food-prepper.
- Not caring because I know my body now and how it behaves (for the most part).

This is a story for another day, and I will leave it as such. The important point is that Fall 2013 became the unknowing
start of my "High-Octane" life chapter. Now that I was a skinny-fat 160lb (73kg), I felt like I could actually work out
now. So Fall 2014, my last semester of university (the fifth one if you are counting), marked the start of my athletic
phase. There was a singular goal to be achieved had a goal, which was to be able to do one chin-up.

A chin-up is the variant of the pull down exercise where the bar is griped where the palms face in and the elbows are
pointed away from the body. It is the bicep-centric variant of the king body weight pull exercise. (The pull-up is the
variant where the palms face outwards and the elbows travel into the sides of the body at the top of the motion).

Being obese growing up, it was something I was never able to do. There was a vivid memory of when I first started
working out which was: "I wish I started sooner, that way everything, right now, would not be as difficult."
Having a head start would have been nice, however everybody has to start somewhere. Curling any weight more than 12lbs
was a struggle. Somehow, I expected to be able to hold onto and pull down 80lbs (36kg) with each hand. It took a solid 5
months of working out for me to be able to perform one chin-up.

The completion of the fall semester 2014 cemented how I wanted to and am still currently living my life. I was able to
complete university with my head held high. In fact, I remember feeling super confident about my last test that I ever
took at university. Not having to cram at the last minute like some others, because I already spent the time and knew
the material. That feeling of being in control and knowing I aced my last exam, is a savory memory. In addition, working
out and being able to accomplish things I never thought possible, was amazing. The bonus of not feeling like garbage
every day when waking up sealed the deal.

Life satisfaction is amazing, and I yearned for more. The feeling of accomplishment and knowing what I can do anything
if I have a purpose. Validated the past 3 years of hard labor to complete higher level education. I was hooked, and I
knew how the next significant portion of my life should be spent. The desire to know what I am fully capable of
accomplishing, drove that decision. An attempt to make up for the previous 7 years I never really tried at anything
important.

> Note, I do not count time when I was in 6th grade or younger. Nobody expects anything amazing from an 12-year-old.

I desired to see where my full potential lies. If I had run myself into the ground to get it, so be it. Meaning, I would
gladly pick myself back up and ask for more. Purposely seeking out difficult challenges to see how I measure up to my
expectations. Meaning that I spend a fair amount time by myself. Gravitating to areas/challenges where others move away
from, mostly because it is really uncomfortable. The experiences that I have put myself to, deserve their own story and
will be saved for a later article.

At the time of this writing, it has been over 9 years since I realized that I can apply myself and succeed. While it has
been 7 years since becoming a hyper-focused self-improvement zealot. About 4 of those I have dedicated to my career
building _ultramarathon_.

Join me as I share lessons learned from trying really hard to find self actualization and seeing what I can handle.
