---
title: "Next Chapter"
metaTitle: "What do I want?"
metaDescription: "This is the meta description"
---

This is the exciting part of the whole adventure, nothing is written in stone at the moment. Everything is subject to
change, and I get to choose where go. Sure, I may not have complete control over what happens around me. However, I have
complete and absolute control as to how I handle the cards I am dealt.

Though I may not know explicitly how my next coming years are going to fold out, I do know what I would like to be
missing. The absence of feeling like I need to prove something every day, in the form of committing and pushing code to
source code repositories, is one of them. That is not to say that is something I never want to do again, I just do not
want it to be seated with the level of importance it has right now.

The idea that I can grow as a person, without needing to be in-front of a computer, or documenting it so others know I
am self-improve improving, is not far fetched. Convincing myself that is the case is another feat in of itself. I have a
ton of momentum and inertia built up, at the moment. There are projects that I _do_ want to be spending my time on,
however, they are not the only things that I need to work on.

I would like to spend my focused energy on other topics, that are not career building, as well. Tre is more to life than
just become a really valuable employee. The vast pool of experiences, I have yet to tap, is invigorating.

# Foreign Experiences

I have been leading a fairly white-bread life so far. Do not get me wrong, being plain is great and not experiencing
adversity has had its advantages. However, I feel like I am missing out on various character building exercises. Being a
white, late-twenties, middle-class, male living in America, basically means that I am invisible. Nothing really special
about me at first glance. I do not stand out, sometimes it is nice being able to blend in and pretend that nobody can
see me.

However, I have gotten comfortable with that, and would like to know what it is like to be _different_, an outsider. I
feel like there are many things that I can discover about myself, if I become immersed into a place where I am _not_ the
standard.

That means that I get to travel! The real question was, where to?

Growing up just knowing one language has made me feel like I am missing out on something. All I have ever known, is
English, and becoming fluent in another language was a foreign concept. Sure, I have dabbled in learning Spanish in
high-school, but I wanted to choose something that was difficult to learn and very different from English.

The first thing I did was to pass over learning Japanese. I feel like one of the weird anime fans, where I enjoy
consuming Japanese pop culture, but have a small desire to actually visit the country.

The other acceptance criteria was that it had to be at least applicable to my future career. So skipping over learning
Arabic was a sound choice. Which narrowed down the list to: Russian, Hindi, or Chinese.

The large majority of the users of my software products, which is related to software development, comes from 3
countries: China, The United States, and Russia. The argument for learning Russian was strong, there are a ton of slavic
hackers and the language appears to be in different league of its own. Learning Hindi was also very appealing. It was
also very foreign as compared to English. Another big plus, and this might because of the availability bias, but going
to school and starting my professional career, I have been around a bunch of Indian folk. In fact, at the time that I
was deciding, both of my co-workers where from India.

Ihe end, I decided that learning Mandarin was the best choice. Not only is the language visually nothing like English,
it is also spoken by a large mass of people. Granted, that mass is not anywhere near the center of America, but still.
We live in an age where we are becoming more connected, and I felt like China has the most promise. There is a wealth of
potential sources of information, help, and experiences, that exist across the ocean.

When I started, I knew that I would be in it for the long haul. Everything I had read from others accounts, is that I
would not expect to see results for over 2 years. 虽然去年我开始学习中文很但是我还是新手。Let me tell you right now, for me, Chinese is
quite difficult. I have to memorise not only the characters, but also the stroke order, tones of the character, any tone
changing rules when paired with other characters, and sprinkle in a bit of grammar. Thankfully, Chinese grammar is not
very difficult.

So with that decided, I would like to at least have the chance to visit China before I decide where I want to go next in
life. Given that 2021 is still a world lingering in a pandemic, I still have plenty of time to keep studying before I
get a chance to visit.

# Meeting New People

Another area of my life that I have neglected, is the social aspect. While I have spent most of my time building myself
up alone, that does not mean that I am completely introverted. I have these things called social skills, I can hold a
conversation on interesting topics, and am generally articulate with my thoughts. While I do not explicitly seek out
social interactions, it is not I am not worn down by it. Social preferences is something that I believe can be adjusted.
Meaning that I am not set on one end of the spectrum or the other.

Right now, my current goal in life is to be the best version I can possibly be, and other people cannot do that for me.
The can give me the opportunity to allow myself to go to the next level, but I am the one who has to do that work. I
have not focused on other people at the moment, because they could not give me what I wanted. The validation that I was
seeking, was something I thought only I could give myself.

The task that I set for myself does not have a clear end state. Meaning, I have no idea if I will ever finish what I
started. There will always be something else to improve on, and settling for _good enough_ will not cut it. This is the
tricky balancing act of trying to find the right transition which will allow me to change my current direction.

I know that this stage has a lot of new challenges to overcome. Forming relationships with other people is not a
one-sided endeavour. Whereas, if I am working on just myself, I can bend reality in my favor. Such that no matter what I
do, I can feel like I am being successful. The thought of losing this option, is a bit unnerving. I attribute a lot of
my current character, to my ability to skew reality to working in my favor. Essentially giving me the ability to
overcome great challenges, and accomplish goals that I find valuable.

As I make the switch, the way I judge my success is not only dependent on my perspective, but also the others that I
interact with. I still want to be true to myself and do not want to conform just to appease others. There are many
unknowns that lie ahead, and I feel uncomfortable about this leg of my journey. However, being uncomfortable is
something I intentionally seek out, because that means there is an opportunity for growth.

Over the course of time, there are going to be many hurdles to overcome in the new path that I am taking. Getting
started, and continuing to work on this part of my life seem to be the greatest challenges that need to be overcome. The
allure of wanting to fallback and do what I have always done before, is strong and needs to be resisted.

The reason for wanting to grow this new aspect of my life needs to be stronger than everything else. Much like
everything else that I do (and I guess everybody else does too), is an attempt to give my life purpose and meaning. As
of today, most of the actions that I have taken up to know, has been growing my career and setting myself up for
financial success in the future. I feel like I have checked most of those boxes at the moment, and will continue to be
diligent as time passes. Though I may never be at a satisfactory level, I need to accept that where I am at should be
acceptable.

Meaning that the underlying motives as to why I want to start this new chapter of my life, is not the same as it has
been before. Actually, before I explain anything, they are almost the same thing, just from a different perspective. I
will elaborate more once I have actually spent the time explaining the real reason I want to move on.

Yes, I want to meet new people and get the chance to make more friends. The idea that others have figured things out
about life, that I have not yet, is an exciting prospect. I want to build and strengthen relationships with others. Most
of the things that I want out of life, cannot be bought with money. Though they can be purchased via time and effort.

While I am going out there looking for many people to connect with. Each of these connections I expect to yield
different rewards. For instance, it could be a new opportunity to work on a difficult problem, a chance to impact the
lives of others, or some other great things. I have had a fair amount of time to think about it, and I feel like the
only meaningful purpose is that of being able to help others. We are put on this earth to help each other out, and I
want to excel at that.

A common theme from the books that I have read, is that when your purpose becomes greater than yourself, you become
capable of more things. When the motive to continue shifts from the self to others, what you can accomplish can become
greater. Disciple can be fueled by the need to accomplish something greater than yourself.

It is this prospect that excites me the most. Knowing that I can push the boundaries of what I am capable, to even
further limits. Though it is not just about self growth that I have my eye on. Even though as a growth, I become capable
of helping others.

No, I have also set my sights on one specific person as well. Though I do not know who she is, I do know that she does
exist right now. Her name and face are currently unknown to me, but I cannot stop thinking about her. I have spent
enough time with myself, to know who I am and what I want out of life. What I want next, is the opportunity to build the
amazing experience together, with someone special. I want to be the reason that she has had the greatest meaning out of
life. I feel as though that is my next purpose in life, is to become the reason for someone else. While I could continue
to write thousands more words on my romantic fantasies. If I do not do anything about my current life, they will just
remain pleasant thoughts.

# What's Next?

I need to _start_ and see myself through this next chapter I have planned for my life. While these next goals have
ambiguous definitions of success, that does not prevent them commencing. Figuring out where I want to go is the
difficult part. Knowing that the direction I am heading is the right one, is what drives the discipline to keep moving
forward. Sure, there may be days when little to no progress is made, or even setbacks may occur. Having a goal is the
beacon in the foggy night sky, guiding me to where I need to be.

It may be a bit cliché, but it is not totally about the destination, but the journey to is also important. I have zero
idea, what the path to my goals will look like. What I do know is what I want next. There are people who depend on me
whether they know it or not. I owe it to them to take my next steps forward.

As I look back now, the reason that I feel stuck, is a bit silly. The idea of giving up working on a process that I
never activly advertised, until now. In attempts to establish a good first impression, that I will never present. Not
wanting to quit, until I feel like I have reached a level I am satisfied with. Knowing full well that day will never
come.

What I have hoped to have gotten out of this exercise, is the piece of mind needed to let go and take the next steps. My
focus needs to be directed towards the next challenge ahead, and not back to, what is now, comfortable.

I also hope that you found some new nugget of information. Something that might be helpful for use later in life.
If nothing else, you managed to kill sometime though!

Here's to the future, cheers!

-Alex
