---
title: "Maths Mountain"
metaTitle: "This is the title tag of this page"
metaDescription: "This is the meta description"
---

Early into my journey, I learned and strongly believed in a very important fact: "I can do anything if I set my mind to
it." There is a catch though, "given enough time and effort." Which is very important, because that is necessary for
managing expectations. Life is all about managing expectations. If I was expecting to be able to understand linear
algebra calculus, without having a firm grasp of the prerequisites, in a short period of time. Then I was setting myself
up for heaps of disappointment. However, if I was expecting that it would take me a year or more of dedicated study to
accomplish that task. Then I could start to see myself actually being able to accomplish that objective. It would take a
lot of time, work, and effort, but I could do it.

# Machine Learning

There was a day when I realized that I might be in trouble. I had just watched a presentation on what neat things people
can do with artificial intelligence and machine learning. I was also still paying attention to what other people had to
say about new developments in technology. The feeling that the future involves more data-centric and machine provided
solution was very strong. I wanted to remain in a position, where I could still make contribution to that new future.
However, the sinking feeling that I was getting was because I knew a very heavy fact. My math skills where awful. How
could I expect to make machines dance, if I lack a strong foundation in mathematics?

I was able to skate by college with a shoddy foundation of math, created by neglect in my early learning days. I knew I
had to re-build my foundational understands in order to have any semblance of success in these data science fields. At
least, that is what I thought at the time. The only way forward that I could see, was to re-learn all the basics and
work my way back up to a level where I could do something interesting. That way, I could have the confidence, that I do
indeed have the strong foundational knowledge to attempt anything machine learning related.

At the base of the mountain, and really long road up, was where I knew I was at. The goal was to be able to comfortable
understand, complete, and pass the exams provided by
the [MIT Linear Algebra course](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-06-linear-algebra-spring-2010/) so that I
could start taking all the [fast.ai](https://www.fast.ai/). In order to get there, I had to build up my foundational
knowledge that I knew I lacked.

### Human Learning

I had to leave my ego at the door, and fully embrace that my math skills where that of a child. Thankfully, there is an
amazing resource, that help children learn maths online https://www.khanacademy.org.

Here is the learning track that I followed to take me to a place where I felt comfortable taking the linear algebra
course offered by MIT:

- Algebra I
- Geometry
- Algebra II
- Trigonometry
- Pre-Calculus
- Statistics & Probability
- Differential Calculus
- Linear Algebra

Thankfully, the resources provided by Khan Academy are put really well together and easy to comprehend. Performing the
exercises before being shown how to solve theme, really helped with my mathematical intuition. The sheer volume of
content needed to be covered, was the most difficult part about this leg of the journey. At the time, I had 4 hours
in-between working, sleeping, and exercising to work on whatever I wanted. Therefore, I dedicated the first two hours
after waking up, six days a week, for the next year and some to overcoming this task.

One of my goals was to not finish as quickly as possible, my ultimate goal was to build a really strong fundamental
knowledge foundation of math. While completing the required courses where the goal, understanding the content being
taught was the ultimate goal. Math is a perishable skill, so I knew that I would forget things as time went on. What I
wanted to retain was the confidence and necessary intuitions to re-figure out the problems.

That being said, it took a mass of willpower to accomplish this task. What kept me going on the tough days was the
thought of not being intimated by my lack of mathematical foundation. That being said, if you ever find yourself
struggling to care mid-way through a large task, you can do the following. Take a step away, consume a small amount of
pure sugar (8 grams works for me), and come back to the task 3 minutes later. Your brain runs on glucose, and the sugar
essentially replenish the "Give a damn" tanks in your brain. You should find that you are able to hold your focus on the
task at hand much easier than before. This works for any difficult task.

The difficulty of this task also prevented me from dedicating the entirety of my free time to reaching my goal. I wanted
to remain hungry to complete the task, and still see the value in continuing. This was a monumental task that I knew
needed to be completed. There were times that it felt like I was doing things inefficiently because of how I partitioned
my effort. Like I was moving slowly to accomplish things because I was only doing half of the work. I had another 2
hours that I was not taking advantage of. What made things more difficult, was I also had the same thoughts on the other
tasks I worked on in the other 2 hours not dedicated to maths.

I was moving slowly at accomplishing two things, because my attention was divided between both of them. However, I knew
that I am not a math focus juggernaut, and I _would_ stop caring if my entire time was dedicated towards this task. So
looking back, I think that is what kept me going, because I remained hungry to complete the task.

I finally reached the milestone, where I could no longer put off starting the MIT Linear Algebra course. The goal for
this course was to understand the concepts and not finish as quickly as possible. I wanted to follow the syllabus of the
course, and pretend like I needed to pass, so I can work on AI stuffs. Which meant that: I watched the video lectures,
then read the chapters outlined, worked on the assigned homework problems, and took the tests provided. While I am
grateful these resources are provided for free, but the difficulty factor of this course was next level. Even grading
our own homework proved to be difficult, and we did not have a teaching assistant to help us out.

Thankfully, I found somebody else to work alongside me in completing the course. We spent the next 3 months (I think)
spending our free time, working the homework problems together, completing exams, and studying together. We finally
reached a point where we were able to take the final exam. I distinctly remember going into that exam and treating it
like it was the real thing. The feeling of, "Yeah, I understand what is being asked here" probably made up for the past
year and a half of dedicated effort.

Once we felt like we felt like we had our fill of difficult mathematics, we were able to move to the next phase of
education, machine learning. https://www.fast.ai/ is the free resource that we used as the entry point into this world
of data science. Thankfully, this portion of the journey was much easier to work on. Solving the problems in this course
actually yielded things that where interesting. Rather than ending up with just a notebook filled with notes, I actually
had a program that did interest things.

What was even better was, I felt confident going into the courses and while taking them, because I understood the
concepts at the core. In the end, I was able to go through the entirety of the material provided by the nice folks at
fast.ai. Which includes me building my own regression model from scratch.

I eventually reach a point where I had consumed everything that was offered from this resource, and I hit a major
milestone. I distinctly remember the feeling of "Now what?" once I had completed my goal of being able to work with
machine learning.
