---
title: "Hardest Challenge"
metaTitle: "This is the title tag of this page"
metaDescription: "This is the meta description"
---

There are many long-running tasks that I have performed over my the entirety of my life, many of which during my
ultramarathon. It could be from: [learning how to communicate well](../accomplishments/a_thecommunicator),
to [re-learning mathematics](../accomplishments/b_machinelearning), or even my journey as an athlete.

One task stands above them all as the most difficult to perform. It comes in the shape of breaking an existing habit. As
you might have already been able to tell, I have _very_ strong routines, so my habits are strongly set.

If you had asked me what my hardest challenge was, 7 years ago, I might have answered, giving up https://reddit.com.
Reddit was engraved into my daily life, such that I would always be checking it if I had downtime. I needed constant
stimulation and Reddit solved that for me. However, I did not like the headspace that it put me in, so I decided to quit
cold turkey. I soon realized that I did not really use the internet for much other than using Reddit. So I had a bit of
an empty pit that Reddit left behind. Breaking muscle memory of constantly checking to see if people said interesting
things, is really tough, but not as tough as the thing that I struggled the most to accomplish.

**Getting enough sleep** is the current hardest challenge I have had to overcome. The years of me trying to become the
best version of myself required me to pick up a new mindset, outlook on life, and habits. This turned me into a tightly
wound machine that was capable of accomplishing many things. Unfortunately, this can also lead to problems of another
sort, not being able to wind down.

Working out and busting my butt, honestly is the easiest part of the day. To this day, I still do not know where my
endless internal drive is sourced. I do know that have no trouble running myself into the ground, getting back up and
doing it again. I would fill my days to the brim with character building activities. Then would wonder why I am having
such a hard time falling to sleep.

Well, I eventually figured out what my problem was, and it only took me up until the time of writing this to figure it
out.

# How it started

In the very beginning of my athletic journey, I wanted to be good at road cycling. Well, the biggest problem about road
cycling, is that you have to share the road with fast moving, instant death machines. To prolong my life, the safest
workaround that I could think of was to perform the activity in the early hours of the morning. The idea was, it is hard
to get hit by a car if everybody is still sleeping. This worked out well, for the most part, traffic was almost
non-existent, however it was also dark. This meant that I had to be tricked out in lighting gear to see and to be seen.
Another big problem is when it started to get colder. I learned early on, that I was not going to let the weather stop
me from getting my ride in. As you might have guessed, the sun keep things warm, and when It's not up it gets _really_
cold. It gets to the level of cold where you have to wrap your feet, that already have two socks, in aluminium foil to
avoid loosing heat.

Anyways, the point that I am trying to get at, is that I had to wake up early for this to happen. I would get up at 4:30
and be out the door by 5:00 to hit the roads. I would continue to keep this habit well beyond when I switch athletic
goals. My normal habit now is, wake up at 4:00, start working on my free-time project, stop at 6:00. Get myself around
and be done working out around 7:30. After that, it would be off to work from 8:00 to 16:00. After completing work for
the day, I would eat, meditate, and walk before 17:00. From 17:00 to 19:00 I would then continue my other free-time
project. Once 19:00 rolls around, I needed to prep my meals for the next day, shower, eat, and try to get to sleep.

That was my routine for the longest time, and I was wondering why I was having such a hard time getting to sleep. I
would look at my schedule, and think that I have an entire hour to wind down, so why am I having issues?

It evolved to the point, where I was also having trouble sleeping on the weekends as well. The entire time I knew that I
had a problem, but I did not do anything about it. I knew that sleep was important, however I was neglecting it, getting
6-7 hours worth of sleep a night.

# Lying to myself

You and I both know this fact very well, "Sleep is important." We both might know this fact, but I did not _understand_
the significance of it. Voluntary comatose is crucial for peak performance. Even after reading these books on human
performance:

<details>

<summary>Performance Books (click to open)</summary>

- [Peak](https://www.audible.com/pd/Peak-Audiobook/B01F4A9EFW)
- [Peak Performance](https://www.audible.com/pd/Peak-Performance-Audiobook/B071ZSYCXB)
- [Why We Sleep](https://www.audible.com/pd/Why-We-Sleep-Audiobook/B0752ZQR33)
- [Deep Work](https://www.audible.com/pd/Deep-Work-Audiobook/B0189PX1RQ)

</details>

I knew the significance of what having a good night of sleep gives you, however I still did not understand that it _did_
apply to me as well. I had a bunch of habits that enabled sleep deprivation, and was doing nothing about it.

The lie that I told myself was, "I am strong-willed, therefore I have habits. Because my habits are hurting me, I can
change my habits." It was not until I reached a really tough point in my life, that the previous statement was **the
biggest lie**, I ever told myself.

Over the years of my self-improvement journey, have had one goal I held sacred, "Though shalt not lie to thyself."
Lying is only good for attempting to impress others, and it _does not_ help get one stronger. Just because you might be
impressed, does not change the fact that I did not or could not do it.

The one of the most prevalent places where this come into play is: athleticism. You can lie to yourself about being
capable, but that does not make you stronger. Sure, I could through around a heavy weight and pretend like I am strong,
but that just makes me prone to injury and empty on the inside. What is the point of doing something, just to impress
other people? I am the one that has to live with myself at the end of the day. I am the one that has to give my life
meaning, I have to fight my battles. Just because other people think that I am cool, does not solve my problems. Sure it
might help, but in the end, I am the one that has to put up with my hardships. Yes, others can support me, but I am the
one that has to pull myself out of the hole.

Overtime, I have learned that it is the actions that we take when we feel the worst, that defines what we are capable of
accomplishing. I cannot achieve self actualization by building on un-truths, because lies do not help when you feel like
crap and want to give up. What I am trying to get as is, I do not want to lie to myself.

# Breaking the Habits

The wave of realization that washed over me when I realized that the lie I had been telling myself, was just a slightly
mis-worded statement. Instead of, "I am strong-willed, therefore I have habits, and because my habits are hurting me, I
can change my habits." What it actually was "I am strong-willed, because I have habits. My current habits are hurting
me, I can use my habits to change myself." I only realized this when I went through a spout of an existential crisis.
The fact nothing really mattered, and there was no real point in doing anything started to feel really heavy. My current
life philosophy, is that there is no point in life, so that means there is no reason to not make the most out of it. The
only meaning in life is what you give it. Therefore, when things start to feel pointless, I can just dig into the things
that I gave meaning before and just wade through hollowness. It is because I have such strong habits, that I am able to
be resilient. I have normally exited the bouts stronger than before and knowing myself better.

By this time in my life, I have acquired many habits, and I have broken many habits. However, nothing that I was doing
was working on helping me sleep a bit better. Everything become _super_ interesting right around the time I should be
going to sleep. The most common thing that I would tell myself is, "I bust my behind all day, I deserve 20 extra minutes
or another episode." However, that would keep happening, and I would find myself putting the phone down at 21:30.

So the first thing that I would attempt to do, is set an alarm that tells me to put down the phone and start to get
ready for bed. An important factor that I learned was I needed to respect this alarm to go to sleep like I do the waking
up alarm. I have never had a problem waking up, fact I am almost always ready to go the moment the alarm goes off. Which
is another habit that needed to be broken. However, I did not get the shutdown alarm the same respect, therefore I
started to ignore it and slipped back into the habit.

Nothing that I was doing at the time would get me to respect the alarm, because I needed more time to relax. I kept
thinking to myself, "I have an entire hour to wind down and get to sleep, I can get this to work."
As time passed, it was clear that I needed to do something that I _really_ did not want to do. I had to sacrifice my
precious time, devoted to work, to getting to sleep. Before I implemented my drastic change, I used to have 20 hours of
dedicated focus time to accomplishing tasks during the weekday. This was the time between, sleeping, working out,
overhead activities, and my day job. I held onto those hours because that was the time I would be building myself up.
Those 2 hours before and after work is where my goals where being achieved. Changing that to 17.5 hours felt like a
betrayal to my goals. The part of me that is driving my goal to becoming amazing, was strongly against that. It also
just so happens that part of me is also very loud and holds the majority of control.

However, the part of me that realizes I am short-changing all of my current efforts, by not getting enough sleep
eventually won over. Instead of stopping the presses at 19:00, the new closing time is now 18:30. Starting this felt
like it went against everything I had been doing all these years. I have even been spending my money on outsourcing
work, like getting groceries, so I could have more time to advance my goals. I acknowledge all the negative thoughts
that came up, and moved on with my life. Since I could not overcome this by shear will-power, I needed to sacrifice the
very thing that was causing me degrade.

This gave me the respect I needed for my shutdown alarm. What was the point of giving up my precious time, so that I
could sleep more, if I was not taking the action to get to sleep sooner? Having overcome that habit that lead to a poor
sleep cycle, it was time to tackle the next habits.

**The smartphone** is amazing an amazing tool to ruin any good night of sleep. I would browse the phone in bed and leave
it charging right next to me overnight. Every book that I had read about getting to sleep, stated that they put the
phone on the other side of the room or in another room. I heard the words they were saying, but I did not listen. I
thought I was different, I am strong-willed, therefore I should be able to ignore my phone or put it down when
necessary.

You can probably guess, that that did not happen, and I would cling to my phone. Why does everything have to be so darn
interesting before going to sleep? Another awful habit that I had been I needed to constantly check email. If I woke up
from a sleep cycle, I would reach for my phone and check my email.

I think the epiphany that I had was right after I got done working out on a day that I was tired from a bad night sleep.
I distinctly remember thinking, "Why do I need to check my email overnight or on my phone at all? I am not going to do
anything about the knowledge I got, or respond. So why do I keep doing it?" I did not have a good answer to that
question. That was the night that the phone got put on the far end of the room. The physical distance was enough for me
to quickly put myself back into bounds. It only took me a really long time to put my ego aside and listen.

Now that my nocturnal email checking habit was starting to break, I had one last problem I needed to break. Waking up at
04:00 and expecting to perform difficult tasks less than 10 minutes of waking up, can create big sleeping issues. For
me, it was I wanted to be ready to go as soon as possible, because I needed as much time to accomplish the mammoth goals
I set for myself.

I had it set in my head that everything should be timed by _sleep cycles_, which are about 2 hour intervals where your
brain patterns change in sleeping. If you are woken up in the middle of one, you would feel like you would be in a fog
for the rest of the day. That is what I had at least convinced myself into believing, so I tried really hard to not fall
back asleep if I woke up less than an hour from my alarm clock.

You might be aware, but our brain is built in with a _really_ good internal clock. It is so good in fact, that it is a
bit scary. I adopted the [Pomodoro Technique](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique) a long time ago. My
working sets are 27 minutes, and my resting intervals are 3 minutes. When my rest interval comes up, I get up and take a
break, mostly looking out a window or something. Well, it's gotten to the point where I feel like I have had enough of a
break and go to sit back down. By the time my rear hits the table, the bell to start the next working set rings. Almost
as if I felt the passage of 2 minutes and 45 seconds without actually keeping track.

Anyways, this also means that it applies to sleep durations as well. The amount of times that I have woken up 3-5,
minutes before 04:00, gave even more merit to my internal clock. Couple waking up 5 minute before the alarm and not
wanting to fall back asleep in fear of breaking a sleep cycle, will result in getting a restless night sleep.

I was seriously convinced that I _needed_ to know what time it is, because I could be needed to wake up really soon.
That would be enough for me to crawl to the other side of the room, to check my phone to see the time. It would also
happen when I needed to take a leak overnight as well. This was often, because I drink almost a gallon of water a day.

This proved to be the most difficult habit to break. Going to bed, and waking up not knowing the time difficult.
Thankfully, I do not own any clocks other than my phone, so I did not need to get rid of anything. I just had to trust
that my phone will go off when I told it to, and leave the rest to sleeping.

When I would wake up from a sleep cycle, I had to resist the urge to check the phone to see the time. This was such a
hard-wired habit too. Each time I woke up, I had to re-assure myself that knowing the time did not matter. Even if it is
15 minutes to 04:00, if you get woken up you _will not_ feel like death. There was no easy solution to overcoming this
habit, in fact it went along with another habit.

When I would wake up to take care of business, my mind would kick into overdrive. Obviously, I had just woken up,
therefore it means that I should start firing on all cylinders to today's task can start. By the time I would get back
into bed, my mind would be racing.

This would happen almost everytime I needed to get up. This was happening in tandem with weening myself off knowing the
time. I had no good solution to this, because I would almost instantly start thinking about things as soon as I got up.
I wish I had a better solution to this, but I do not. The way that I fixed this was, just hold it and take care of it
when 04:00 rolls around. It could wait until the unknown time period is reached.

Sleep is such a difficult task to work with. I cannot sleep on demand, the best I can do is set the conditions for
sleeping. Then hope that it eventually works. I know that being high-strung was my issue, because when I relaxed I could
sleep in. I dedicated Saturdays to be an active recovery day. I would not expect myself to accomplish feats of will on
that day. Saturdays where dedicated to un-winding and avoiding stimulus. Which made the night between Saturday and
Sunday, the only night that I could sleep more than seven hours.

I knew what the problem was, its just I had to break all the habits, that when combined gave me a terrible night sleep.
I had to look out for morning Alex, because he needs to be in top shape. However, night Alex wants to stay up and look
at all the interesting things. Eventually, it took me completely detaching from my phone and all of my habits. What I
lost in connectivity with the world, I gained in clear headspace. That reward is far more satisfying.

I would like to say that I solved my sleeping problems, the best I can say is, I am moving in the right direction. I no
longer have the desire to know the time at night. Even if I do get woken up by the alarm, my mind quickly gets to a
clear and active state. I think the best thing that has come out of this is that I can actually sleep in on both nights
of the weekend.

I had changed something that I had no direct control over, by changing my habits that set my environment. While I cannot
really tell you if my studies or performance have gotten better. I do not measure any of those at the moment, I can say
that my quality of life has gone up. I no longer feel like I am at the whims of the sleep fairy, and I can get full
nights rest. I still have to hold any bathroom activities until I wake up, but I am starting to notice that I can get up
and return to sleep faster.

The sheer amount of effort to fix my poor sleeping habits awards this as the greatest challenge I have faced so far. My
biggest problem is, that I cannot relax or get comfortable. While it may be a side effect of neglect during my
ultramarathon, it is something I _can_ fix. I just have to be ever vigilant to set the right conditions, and not slide
down the slope of regression. Thankfully, I have the confidence in knowing that habits that I form, once set are almost
there to stay.
