---
title: "Greatest Fear"
metaTitle: "2spooky4me"
metaDescription: "This is the meta description"
---

Being scared has its place in life. It is a normal emotion to feel. If it was not normal, then why was this added to our
portfolio of feelings? There are many categories that the emotion, fear, can fit into. There is the flavor of fear that
protects you from a painful death. Another one is makes it difficult to perform various social activities, such as
talking to one or many people. There are some that are rational while other are not. However, the brand of fear that I
will be talking about is the fear of the unknown.

There are many things that I still do not understand about myself. For the most part, I can find the various motives for
most of my actions. Most of these just feel like rationalizations to things that might inherently have no meaning. It
makes me feel good, so how bad can it be?

It is the uncertainty of not knowing when a specific inevitable action is going to occur, that bothers me the most. This
may be fear or anxiety. Whatever label is put on it does not change the fact it is not pleasant.

# Setting the Stage

## Adopting Essentialism.

The practice of Essentialism is to let go of anything that is not really important. In turn leaving more time and space
to appreciate what you value the most. You could argue that this is just Minimalism, but with a different attitude.
While you would not be wrong, I tend to steer away for calling myself a Minimalist. The label does not really give
justice to the actual purpose.

It is not necessarily just the act of getting rid of things and avoiding the ownership of many possessions. No, the
concept is more about making space for the things that matter most. When everything is important, then nothing is
important. My attention can only be given to a small subset of things. Therefore, I want to have the capacity to
dedicate a large portion of my focus to a small set things that bring me great meaning. Maximizing life satisfaction.
This is why I feel like the meaning is better conveyed by re-skinning Minimalism as Essentialism.

Owning stuff or buying the next new flashy item stopped appealing to me after some period in my life. Searching for the
next gadget to buy or video game to play, lost its meaning some time in the past. Having _things_ did not necessarily
satisfy my need for purpose.

Another thing that I also wanted to keep more to myself, was my head-space. Having a clear mindset where I can be
present with and not constantly needing to be stimulated, is a feeling I deserve and everybody should know. However, I
live in a world where everything is buying for my attention. One of the first things that I dropped like a hot potato,
was paying attention to things that are out of my control. Why do I need to know about the news or what people are doing
around me, if there is not anything I can do about it? The only thing that I can control, in that respect, is my
attention to it. Sure this may be a close-minded approach to life, but I have found the things that a _really_ important
find another way to reveal themselves outside of media.

# When Will I Stop Caring?

I am quite aware that all of my eggs are currently placed in a select few baskets. Each of these proverbial baskets
combine to give me a sense of value, purpose, and meaning. What bothers me the most is the lack of diversity of my sense
of purpose portfolio.

There is this ever lingering feeling of "when will I stop caring about this so much?". Over the course of my life, I
have never really been able to stick to one thing for a long period of time. The most recent example of loosing interest
is my relationship with video games. All throughout my school life, before higher education, I have always had video
games. That was the only thing that could fill in the hours of the day. Anything else seemed auxiliary. However, once I
reached college, my interest in video games start to fade.

Picking up the controller felt like it was losing its meaning as a fulfilling pastime. Once I entered junior year of
university, almost all interest was lost in playing video games. Playing video games became a hollow task, like I was
just playing for the sake of doing it. How could something that I spent so much time on over the years, not be
interesting anymore?

Looking back, I think it was more that I enjoyed playing with friends than I did playing video games. The interest
started to fade as high-school started to come to an end, and everybody was starting the next journey in their lives.
People moved on, and my circle of video game friends started to disperse.

The uncertainty that my interests will change, and I might be left with nothing, is a really troublesome thought. It has
happened before, something I held close to me and invested so much time into, suddenly lost all meaning.

If I am reading a story that follows a specific narrative. Such as, when the character lives a pure and hardworking
life. Helping others and being an overall stellar human being. However, that changes when they suddenly realize they are
a lazy good for-nothing. Abandoning all semblance of their past life, and embracing the life of sloth and pleasure. I
find that I have a really strong negative reaction and outlook of that character. I know this is because, that could
become me at anypoint. There are only a few things that I do not really get to decision on, one of those being what
gives me meaning. If I already had that figured that out, I would not be talking with you right now.

# There is Hope.

Thankfully, after a fair amount of reflection, I have stumbled across a bastion of hope. There has been one thing that
has remained constant throughout a large majority of the life I have lived so far.

My constant has been, **being the best version of myself as I can be**. This goal has manifested itself in many ways,
but the underlying concept remains the same. It helps settle the unknown of the future, with the reassurance that this
will remain constant.

I can say this because, I vividly remember, when I first got into video games. I was amazed by the skill that my friends
possessed, and I wanted to be just like them. It was awe-inspiring to say the least, and strove to being able to preform
just like them. The road was slow, but as time passed, I could feel myself getting better and better. I could beat video
games on really hard difficulties. I started to be able to pull my weight in PvP. Before I knew it, I was at an advanced
level. To be fair, I was at the cross roads of, not being good enough to be profession but not bad enough to be a scrub.
The best word that I could use to describe myself is that I was "Try-Hard."

Thankfully, right as I was loosing my interest in video games, I found out that I enjoy programming. Currently, I do not
feel my interest programming waining. However, the difficult part of programming is figuring out what I should work on
next. I have a special set of skills, that allow me to build anything I desire on the web. I have a blank canvas, and
seldom have a good idea. I stumble across some good ideas, but for the most part, I am just searching for the next
interesting problem to work on.

Knowing that my seemingly endless pool of devotion is filled in part by my constant, also helps me feel better about my
athletic goals. When I first started building up my body, I went all out. I had nothing better todo and no idea what I
was doing. I just knew that I wanted to press my face into the grindstone, and see how I handle it.

It got to the point where I would wake up, workout for 2 hours, go to work, then ride my bike after work for an hour and
a half. That process would be repeated 6-7 days a week, for a good solid year and a half after I started my profession
career in 2015. This is what I was doing, before I decided that I should be spending my time writing code. It consumed
my entire life, I had no free-time, it was just either, working out, cycling, going to work, preparing to work
out/cycle, or sleeping. I filled my entire schedule, and had no free time. Therefore, I did not have to think about
anything.

Since I did not know any better, I would drive myself into the ground, and ask for more. I was dead set on seeing what I
was fully capable of, rain, shine, below freezing temperatures, to riding over bubbling tar backboards. Nothing was
going to stop me from seeing what I was made of. I was so focused driving myself into the ground, that I did not see my
declining performance.

To be fair, I did see my declining performance, but I chose to ignore it. It was something that I thought I could fix,
by just getting tougher. That is what happens when you work out, you get stronger, right? What I had not learned at the
time, and I probably would have refused to believe, was that rest is important.

You cannot expect your body to recover, if you do not give it a chance to take a break. It because I had the mindset
that rest was "an opportunity to get weak", "form of giving up", or "possibly becoming dis-interested in working out",
that taught me a valuable lesson. It was because I was afraid that any sense recovery would make me want to _give up_,
that I never stopped. A body in motion, stays in motion, right?

Yes, but know. It took me up to the point that I could not even fully perform my regular set of exercises, that
something was wrong here. I would still brush this off, and continue to push through what was very clearly becoming a
problem. It took me almost _15 months_ to realize that, I have a problem and should take a break.

This is the _only_ time in my life that I have been able to over-train my body. I went way past the warning signs, and
went even harder because I saw them. All because I was afraid of giving up and not finishing want I started.

I tell you this story because, learning from this has also instilled the confidence, in my constant. As time passed, and
I was still fighting myself to get some rest, the next chapter in my life started. I got a new job, in another state,
which required me to move to save my life from being spent in a car. This was a major change, I was put in a foreign
area, and I could no longer cling to my safe cycling routes. I also was in a gym that did not have any spinning
equipment (stationary bikes).

What do I do? You guessed it, instead of cycling myself into the ground, I ran myself into the ground. I picked up
running, in place of my previous obsession. At the time, I still was not wise about recovery, but I knew I needed it. So
I compromised, and _only_ ran 3 miles 5 times a week, with a goal of finishing below 30 minutes each time.

It got to the point where I would compress my legs, because it hurt running without it. I saw all the warning signs, but
I continued to ignore them. Well, history repeats itself, but this time I knew just a _little_ bit better this time. At
this point, I still had no idea what I was doing in the gym. I would go in, move some weights around, and get cardio in.

I had no purpose or goals, other than busting my butt. Eventually I got wise, and decided, _I should find somebody who
knows what they are doing_. Finding https://athleanx.com is what put me on the road to salvation. I wanted to be like
Jeff, and he looked like he knew what he was talking about. Jeff knows his stuff, and one of the things that he
emphasizes, was recovery.

It took me trusting Jeff, that I will not spontaneously combust, die, or give up, if I do not take a break. I think it
was the fact that the program _had_ scheduled breaks, and easy weeks, that help a ton. I could get over the uneasiness
of resting, because I trusted my instructor.

It has been well over, three years now, and I am just about getting to a place, where I can start to take it easy. I
fully understand the importance of recovery and taking days off. I have learned, that because I take days off, I demand
more from myself. The fear of ever having the thought _giving up_ working, has long since left. Right now, working out
is something I cling to, my break days currently still prevent me from doing what I enjoy. Except leg day, leg day
sucks. My legs are my biggest muscles, and also the biggest complainers. So they get their due first.

Anyways, that was a long-winded way of saying that I found my constant, and it will be with me for the forseeable
future. Though my interests my change, they will just be a different variation of reaching the same goal.

What I am currently curious about is what is going to replace my infatuation
of [anime girls?](../accomplishments/c_theperfecttheme)

